take the story act it out and stress
test it
see if it helps you overcome the
insuperable obstacle and see if it
protects you from nihilism and despair
and see if it orients you properly in
relationship to yourself and other
people and see what it does with your
relationship with women and and and with
children and with your parents and you
can test the story that way and as far
as I can tell the Bible it is the
compilation of stories that have been
tested in that way yes exactly yes you
you can test it within the text to know
if if your interpretation of the text
makes sense within the text and like you
said that's even a higher level I would
say if you could test it with reality
and then it's another story and and if
you start if you know the Bible very
well and you understand the stories
you you might start to discover that the
patterns that are described in the Bible
Wells are also happening to you all the
time whether you want it or not by the
way
[Music]
hello everyone I'm extremely pleased
today to be engaging in a discussion
with Mr Matthew pajo Who is the brother
of Jonathan pajo whose name may be
familiar to many of you who are watching
and listening and uh if it's not it
probably should be
Matthew paggio lives in Quebec Canada
has been engaged in discussions about
the deepest religious matters with his
aforementioned brother Jonathan pajo a
fine artist Orthodox Christian thinker
and frequent guest on my podcast for
many decades
on Matthew's side these discussions and
the accompanying thoughts resulted in
the production of his 2018 book
the language of creation Cosmic
symbolism in Genesis a commentary which
we are going to walk through today that
book manages the difficult combination
of extreme depth and extreme clarity
in some senses it reads like a
programming Manual of Mythic narrative
laying out the foundation of the
language of creation employed by the
authors of the biblical story that For
Better or Worse undergirds the entire
culture of the West and increasingly the
rest of the world
I hosted Matthew once previously on my
podcast although as a consequence of my
recent illnesses I don't remember that
at all but I am extremely pleased to
welcome him back again today I read his
book in depth in the last weeks and was
struck by its
uh utility on many fronts and the
remarkable manner in which Matthew
manages to render what are often
otherwise impossibly complex and
mysterious symbolic representations both
lucid and clear in a manner that depends
on a tremendous knowledge of the
interrelationship between all the
different aspects of the biblical text
and the interpenetration of all of its
verses and so I thought it would be
extremely useful for me and hopefully
for everyone who's listening and perhaps
even for Matthew to walk through his
book in some detail and then to talk
about what his next set of Ambitions
might be and so welcome Matthew I'm very
much looking forward to talking
all of this through with you
yes thanks for having me
thanks you for that great introduction
oh my pleasure my pleasure it was really
it was really something to read your
book um it's not like any other book on
religious thinking that I've encountered
I'm very familiar with work by Merchant
eliada say and and Carl Jung and they're
much more tilted towards the imagistic
and technically religious side and
become symbolic and narrative in some
way that's akin to say niches thus fake
zarathustra they're more on the poetic
side of things but your work is oddly
positioned in the best Sense on the
rational and uh a propositional side
even though simultaneously it manages to
lay out the symbolic grammar of the
entire biblical narrative and really the
entire narrative and so maybe you can
start by introducing some of that your
book has six parts I'll just go through
them and we'll start with part one part
one is salvaging creation
from the scientific worldview
part two is Heaven and Earth
in biblical cosmology part three is
Heaven and Earth on the human scale part
four time and space in biblical
cosmology part five time and space on
the human scale and then part six
transcending the scientific worldview
and in part one you juxtapose the
scientific worldview with the biblical
worldview and make a strong case well I
would say for the utility of both but
you make a strong case for the utility
of the latter the biblical narrative and
then attempt to outline what it's
attempting to accomplish and so maybe
you could give us a bit of an intro to
that
Yeah so basically what I was attempting
to do in the first part of the book is
move away from a materialistic world
view
towards an ancient world view where
meaning is at the center of everything
so basically logos is
the driving force of everything
whereas in a materialistic perspective
it's about like I like I explained in my
book it's just about understanding how
things work basically how things
function
wait and the other perspective uh is
pretty much the opposite of that
and we've completely lost I think the
other perspective in many ways so it was
relegated to the artistic domain that's
basically what happened
so it still is out there but
for people who are more rationally
minded
uh it's not satisfactory to me it wasn't
at least I enjoy a good painting but my
mind is is not satisfied with that I
need some something more precise and
concrete and also usable
you know your work is predicated on the
idea that
there is
that the act of cognition and perception
is a consequence and correct me if I'm
wrong of something approximating
simultaneous top down and bottom-up
processing and so the top-down
processing is something like the
imposition of a structure of order on
the multiplicity of the world and that
order is implicate it's it's intrinsic
to being itself and it manifests itself
to us psychologically and existentially
and phenomenologically let's say in the
sense of meaning that imbues our
perceptions and actions if we're acting
in proper accordance with the hierarchy
and so for you there's a there's a
pyramid of perception and action
the top of the pyramid is associated
with heaven
symbolically and and and cognitively and
the bottom of the pyramid with the
multiplicity of Earth and the Heavenly
domain is the Pinnacle but also a spirit
that saturates the entire hierarchy and
it's a spirit of unity and Order and
um and the order that is good and it's
also reflective of the implicate order
and and so that would be the logos of
the world is does that seem
approximately correct
yes exactly the idea is kind of like in
mathematics you have some first
principles
and then everything comes from the
meaning that's implicit in the first
principles
so I mean you have some axioms that seem
like they don't contain a lot of
information but when you unpack them
you end up explaining
a lot of phenomenon and part of it also
is it becomes your lens to view reality
so it's it's always incomplete in a
sense but it provides reason for things
order for things purpose
so it's unlike science
uh which claims to just be about
discovering the laws of nature
it also has a
purpose it imposes a purpose on reality
it doesn't just claim to
explain phenomenon
there's a difference well and the thing
that I think is so relevant
in all of that the prime issue of
relevance is the issue of what John
vervacci the cognitive scientist has
been calling relevance realization we
have the problem of what to focus our
attention on and that's actually an
unbelievably pervasive problem and a
deep problem because there's an infinite
multiplicity of phenomena that we could
attend to and combinations of phenomena
that we could attend to in such massive
numbers that it's very difficult to
understand how we don't become
overwhelmed and the way we don't become
overwhelmed is that we impose something
like a point on things and a point is
the point of our perceptions and the
point of our actions and the point in
the ultimate sense is also the ultimate
thing towards which we're striving and
that ultimate thing towards which we're
striving is as far as I can tell
elucidated in no small part in the
biblical cosmology because it's an
attempt to lay out the characteristics
of the spirit that would Orient us
towards the highest good as we go about
our job of perceiving the complex world
and acting in it and so
I mean part of the Revolutionary element
of your thinking is that even our
confrontation with the material world
per se and our ability to derive the
facts upon which a materialist worldview
are is hypothetically based is dependent
on an ethic of perceptual prioritization
and action that's
described in the biblical cosmology and
in and Mythic narratives in general and
so it's it's it's a priori it's it it
exists prior to the act of perception
that even enables us to make contact
with the material world yes yes exactly
we we have some spiritual principles
that we're often not aware of
and then the reason we're not aware of
them is because they're extremely simple
so sometimes we can't see things because
they're too complex and they appear to
us as Darkness
or clouds
but when things are too simple
we also don't see them for a different
reason it's like they're transparent we
don't even see their existence basically
those seem to me to be the axioms upon
which our perceptions are founded and
they're implicit right so they're part
of the structure through which we
actually view the world I'm going to
read something from your book okay and
maybe then you could comment on it
the words Heaven and Earth as quoted in
the verse above which was in the
beginning God created the Heaven and the
Earth
can no longer refer to what we now call
Heaven and Earth from our scientific
viewpoint
the third planet from the Sun and its
atmosphere
instead
the archaic concept of Earth refers to
the lower material half of the entire
universe
and the archaic concept of Heaven refers
to the upper
spiritual half
in general a complete redefinition of
cosmic categories like heaven Earth time
and space will be needed the
implications of these Concepts will then
trickle down to every level of Human
Experience to redefine all things in the
context of the Bible
so
so I think of your work as a
as a programmer's guide to phenomenology
in some sense is that
the world of experience which is the
reality that we know and the only
reality we know has a material half and
it has a psychological half that's
conceptual and there has to be a union
between the conceptual half the half
that exists in abstraction and the half
that exists concretely and it isn't
obvious that the abstract half is any
less real or perhaps any more real than
the material half because the
abstractions that constitute the
spiritual half are abstracted in part
from the patterns that are implicant in
the material half and the material half
can't be encountered or made sense of or
interacted with or perhaps even brought
into being without the imposition of the
upper spiritual half and so the
description of the cosmos in Genesis is
a taoist-like description that that
assumes
Order and Chaos in some fundamental
sense and the meaningful interaction
between the two and your claim is that
not only is that a more comprehensive
description of reality it's also a
necessary description of reality to
Stave off such phenomena as a kind of
corrosive nihilism yes yes I I think
that's a good description of it
um it's it's actually difficult to
understand the concept of Heaven I would
say I wouldn't even say the word use the
word order necessarily although I
understand why you use that word it's
it's hard to find an adequate word for
it uh and similarly the earth I also
have trouble with the word chaos for for
different reasons and I also understand
though why you use that word because I
don't really really have a better
Expressions to use uh there's always a
little bit of something missing
um in any word that that's chosen to
describe these these Concepts but
um I'd say the best way I describe it in
my view is the earth it presents itself
as a riddle
so so in a sense it's related to chaos
uh in the sense of being unordered but
more in the sense of being a meaningless
because you you can have an ordered
reality that's still meaningless
you see the distinction I'm making is
something can be extremely ordered
but have no meaning to it have no higher
purpose to it or no higher meaning to it
and similarly something can be uh
chaotic and you can still see it as a
meaningful uh experience so but I
understand why you use the words chaos
in order I completely understand that I
don't have necessarily better words
big government continues to spend
borrowed money inflation continues to
swell dragging down our economy and the
stock market has entered bear territory
so what's your plan are your assets
Diversified I'm Philip Patrick precious
metal specialist for the Birch gold
group for nearly 20 years we've helped
Americans diversify into gold and we can
help you too did you know you can own
physical gold and silver in attack
sheltered account we can help you
transfer an IRA or 401K tied to stocks
into an IRA in Gold if you're skeptical
about the trajectory of the economy in
the US dollar then take Jordan to 989898
but Gold group will send you a free info
kit on securing your savings with gold
with thousands of satisfied customers
five star reviews and an A plus rating
with the Better Business Bureau we take
Precious Metals seriously text Jordan to
98 9898 for your free info kit
well I wouldn't identify meaning with
chaos or order either it looks to me
that meaning is actually the Instinct
that emerges to signify in your
terminology the proper Union of Heaven
and Earth and I do think that's how we
experience it because when we're engaged
in something deeply meaningful hopefully
like this conversation then we have a
sense that everything is in its proper
place and in balance and we lose our
self-consciousness and we lose our sense
of time
right we we lose our self-conscious
neurotic preoccupations in the immersion
in the moment and there's something
that's deeply paradisal about that and I
do believe that that's a reflection of
the deepest Instinct that we have it's
it's much deeper than than mere
cognition or or mere semantic and
propositional content
yeah there's uh yeah there's a
what we want basically I think is
knowledge what I call knowledge in my
book which is we're looking for a union
of meaning and fact we're not satisfied
with just meaning we're not satisfied
with just things or facts but then when
there's a perfect joining of these uh
Realms that's what we're looking for as
humans that's what I think like that's
what we strive for we strive to
understand abstractly things and then we
strive to concretely express them like
just just understanding a concept is is
not much
and then you have to express it in in
reality in concreteness and you even
have to experience it so I think this is
something that's a little bit missing in
science um
in general like modern science the
concept of experiencing knowledge for
personally experiencing a principle
so it's always about describing the
outer world and even when we talk about
ourselves we're we're describing it as
if we're looking at ourselves from a
like a detached perspective it's
interesting because there are people
who've objected to that characterization
of science quite strenuously I mean
Thomas Kuhn for example spent a lot of
his writing in uh in his work on
scientific revolution insisting that
much of science was in fact an embodied
practice as a practice rather than as a
result right because the result might be
a description of the objective world but
the practice itself is something like
the seeking of Truth uh in relationship
to some orientation to the higher
psychological and communal good and so
it's embedded inside something that has
to approximate a religious ethic
otherwise it well otherwise it's
pointless and otherwise the scientists
themselves wouldn't be motivated to
pursue it because there's an infinite
set of dead facts but there's a finite
set of living facts and the living facts
grip even the scientist and the the
scientist this is also relevant to
something that you talk about in the
book
you talk about that we'll jump ahead a
little bit I guess you talk about the
distinction between a stumbling block or
a stumbling stone and a foundation stone
and the thing that's one of the things
that's very interesting about scientists
is that they assume the existence of a
Transcendent object outside the domain
of their ordered priests suppositions
and then what they search for is the
stumbling block or the anomaly that will
falsify their presuppositions
on the assumption that that relationship
with the Transcendent object will be
corrective that it will expand the
domain of knowledge and that it will be
something to pursue in the pursuit of
the of this of the psychological good
and the common social good I thought the
stumbling block and foundation stone
discussion was particularly brilliant by
the way
yes yes I think
what you were saying before about the
practice of science I think that's how I
view it now
um
what what is similar to ancient
cosmology and what we do today is the
practice of science not the result of
what we find practicing science but the
the practice itself is analogous to a
traditional world view like what you
said you you have some principles that
you try to
see in the world so that's your
scientific theory right and then you
expect to have some obstacles to your
theory and when you find obstacles you
don't necessarily get discouraged you
see it as a
possible way to grow your your own
Theory to make it even more uh inclusive
to make it even more explanatory so that
process that is what the Bible is
talking about that very process
and you refer again to in the beginning
God created the Heaven spiritual reality
and the Earth corporeal reality
and then you quote Genesis 1 2 the Earth
was confused and meaningless Darkness
was on the face of the deep and the
Breath of God hovered over the face of
the waters God said let there be light
and there was light and that confused
and meaningless chaos that's the
tohuvabo who that's the dragon of Chaos
in some sense and so you could imagine
and I believe that your work refers to
this this plenitude of
multiplicitous and potentially
meaningful meaningless confusing facts
and then the attempt by the scientists
to shine a light on those on that set of
facts and to thereby bring something
into illumination and and the habitable
order that is good and that pattern is
established right at the beginning of
Genesis in Genesis 1 2 and it's most
usefully understood in that light in
that that chaotic deep that God
confronts that Horizon of potential in
in the biblical language is a strange
amalgam of the psychological because
it's confusing and off-putting and and
and strange and mysterious and
potentially awe-inspiring but it also
has this material element which is
symbolized by water or the darkness or
the deep and you know we we refer to
that automatically when we speak about
what scientists are doing especially
great scientists because we say things
like well they think deeply or they've
encountered deep phenomena I mean we
refer back to that symbolic language
axiomatically and don't notice the
metaphorical structure of Our Own
utterances
yes definitely so if we just look at
science as a process instead of what
science comes up with with as a model of
the universe then we we see the same
patterns as uh what's described in the
Bible in fact if anyone today that has a
more of a scientific mind wants to
understand uh the story of Adam and Eve
you should you should read it as a
scientist
So Adam is like a scientist
uh who's trying to understand reality
and try to impose his theory upon
reality
so that is Adam names the animals that
means he's trying to impose meaning on
reality and then this answers kind of
the question why did God create Eve in
The Narrative of Adam and Eve because
that's actually a good question he might
have just created this The Man Without
the woman right but what if you're a
scientist you can easily understand that
because
um the reason why he creates Eve is to
counter what Adam is doing and he's
pretty clear in the language if you can
if you read it in the original Hebrew
it's there's a lot of hints to that so
what happens when God creates Eve he he
puts Adam to sleep okay what does that
mean it means
it's an attempt to renew Adam
okay so he loses consciousness
so sleep is like a little taste of death
basically it's like a cyclical thing
where you lose your your ability to
control and to name and to uh command
things so that's what happens when we
fall asleep our mind is loses the
command of the body right so that it's
it's like a Counterpoint to what Adam
just did Adam just names the animals
he's naming everything he's using his
authority to say
this is this the the name of this
phenomenon this is it this is like a
scientist who has a theory and he's
seeing if it works and it's working it's
working it's working and then uh it says
it's not good that Adam is alone
basically because why because he needs a
feedback mechanism for his what he's
doing for his naming because he he can
name phenomenon but he can't name
himself he can't see himself because he
has a perspective he's using his own
perspective to view the world but then
he never bothers to or he can't rather
look look at himself so what he needs is
a
um what's called uh sometimes a foreign
perspective okay uh so he needs this is
what Eve is is represents uh so he falls
asleep and then it says uh God took
aside his side and built a woman into it
see the word for side also means
stumbling stumbling Stone
see so the side of that he took it also
means a stumbling Stone so that is
exactly what it is but it's a good
stumbling Stone and this is very
important Ben Shapiro told me that the
original Hebrew for what's uh translated
as help meet in the King James version
is actually something like beneficial
adversary it's because it says yeah God
created a help
against him that's literally what it
says a help against him but obviously uh
the purpose of God creating Eve is not
to destroy Adam you know this is a
pretty obvious thing but
because if we look at the narrative and
we give importance to each of the events
it it starts with God saying don't eat
from the Tree of the knowledge of good
and evil or you will die
and then right away it says it's not
good that man is alone
so you see it's directly related the
creation of Eve is related to the fact
that he just told him don't eat from the
Tree of the knowledge of evil or you
will die
and then okay Adam names all the animals
but he doesn't find a help
as his opposite
you see he doesn't find his opposite he
needs his opposite to see himself
that's the idea he needs like a mirror
to look into
where he sees an inverse image of
himself so the left and the right are
flipped women women really do this this
would be associated with their
association with the serpent in the
Garden of Eden as well as women really
do provide a critical mirror for men and
that's partly because they're
hypergamous and so women judge men more
harshly in many ways than men judge
women now it's ambivalent but but
there's some truth in it so for example
on dating sites women rate 80 percent of
men as below average interactiveness
whereas men rate 50 percent of women as
below average as attractive in
attractiveness in relationship to
potential short-term or long-term mating
and so the and it's clearly the case
that Eve becomes self-conscious in the
story of Adam and Eve and then makes
Adam self-conscious the scales fall from
both their eyes and now they can see
their own nakedness and their own
nakedness is in some deep sense their
own vulnerability
and so Eve provides as you pointed out a
corrective reflection of Adam and and
you're also stating and this must have
something to do with the association
between even the serpent because the
serpent is the thing that lurks in the
well-ordered place and there's always
something that lurks in the well-ordered
place because no much no matter how much
order you establish that would be true
of a scientific theory there's also
always something left over that speaks
of the infinite that isn't encapsulated
within your theory and Eve is allied
with that force in Genesis and is the
root to self-consciousness for men and
that seems to me again from a scientific
perspective pretty damn accurate and
then you might think as well that part
of the reason that
women make men self-conscious is because
they're mediators between men and
infants and because women
become pregnant and because they give
birth to extremely dependent and fragile
infants they are more conscious of
life's catastrophe and tragedy and more
conscious of the necessity of knowledge
serving life and always serve as a
reminder to men that their capacity for
abstraction and naming let's say isn't
sufficient to exhaust the proper
possibilities of life that all that
abstraction still has to serve life
yes yes exactly she she represents the
opposite of Adam really that's exactly
what is uh it's actually pretty once you
know these things you can see it very
clearly in this story uh so like I said
Adam his job is to name the animals so
what does Eve do she listens to the
animals that's one way to see it so why
is she talking to the snake this is a
question nobody asks themselves which is
which is interesting people sometimes
say wait wait why is this snake talking
in this story because that's obviously
an anomaly I mean snakes don't talk
right so why is this snake talking but
the real question they should be asking
themselves is
how can Eve understand the snake how
does Eve know how to understand what the
snake is saying because that's what Eve
has Adam it has the ability to name the
animals so this is what you are this is
what you are and it's a general it's a
way to symbolize the general idea of
assigning meaning to things or imposing
meaning upon things
and what Eve does is she does the
opposite she mediates with the Earth
that means with matter that has no
meaning or that has not been given
meaning and also with things that Adam
has named but that are not satisfied
with the meaning that Adam has given so
we can actually think that that's what
the snake is up to a little bit in the
story so it represents basically so we
can say Eve is mediating the the the
perspective of the Earth or of nature so
it's actually it's this story is really
really deep I mean it it represents
basically the right wing in the left
wing if you look at it at a bigger scale
at a political scale Adam is the
traditional perspective he represents
uh we have tradition we have the past we
have our our insights from the past and
we order things according to that so
that's what Adam is doing Eve really
represents the left wing if he
represents
I'm going to
listen to Nature
and if I don't if it doesn't agree with
what Adam is doing I'm going to try to
mediate that so the ecological movement
represents uh basically what Eve is
doing it represents the feminine aspect
as described in the story so it's about
maybe the snakes is not happy with the
name that Adam gave gave the snake you
see what I'm saying but it's just a
general symbol for any anything that you
can impose meaning upon can then turn
around and say complain about it no I
disagree I mean every phenomena has a
finite aspect that's categorizable and
that can be subdued and brought into a
kind of cognitive order but it has a
Transcendent element that constantly
escapes from that and that has to be
taken into account and the problem with
imposing an order that's final on
anything is that you lose the connection
to the Transcendent and so and then you
can think about that on an even broader
scale which of course you've done which
is that the garden that Adam and Eve
inhabit where everything is named is a
kind of of order that's imposed and it's
reasonably well balanced but there's
still always that possibility that
something that hasn't been taken into
account yet is going to upset the apple
cart and then there's an even broader
possibility that in the highest possible
sense that it's good that the apple cart
gets upset because it produces an
advance towards the next stage
there is a sense in which and and
Christianity makes this the Christian
Corpus of thought makes this quite clear
there's there's an aspect in which the
Fall From Paradise is a cosmic cataclysm
and that it propels human beings into
the suffering of History
but it's also the precondition for the
emergence of the higher order that's
symbolized by the voluntary sacrifice of
Christ as a as a culmination of the
entire biblical narrative and there's
some implication there that
to become innocent once again like we
were in the garden of paradise but to be
self-conscious and knowledgeable as
adults at the same time is actually
better than the kind of unconscious
paradisal state that we inhabited
um before we became self-conscious let's
say in the Garden of Eden think it was
T.S Eliot who said something like we
need to return to the beginning and know
the place for the first time
and and that's a well that's a that's a
that's the fundamental theme of the
let's say The Exodus narrative where
there's a fall from tyranny into the
desert and then a movement toward the
promised land but it's the
meta-narrative of the entire Bible and
it's something like a description of the
structure of cognitive and conceptual
revolutions towards a higher and higher
form of unification differentiation and
and uh plenitude that might be a good
way of thinking about it yeah there's
definitely
this is the thing the fall though is not
is not a good thing but I understand
with your what you're getting at the
every piece of the puzzle that you're
describing was there in the garden
so if if Eve wasn't there then there'd
be a problem she's but she's there
though she is there to mediate with this
serpent so the sin of Eve and the sin of
Adam is not that they listen to The
Serpent is that
that was a good thing actually you
should you have to listen to The Serpent
but the the serpent tricked them that's
the whole thing and how does it work I
mean um
there's certain facts or certain puzzles
that we don't have the ability to solve
yet okay and then when you try to
integrate those facts into your system
but you don't have the ability to solve
them yet
then it causes some problems because
once you have inside of you or inside of
your system something that is uh against
you
but not in a good way like I was talking
about Eve Eve is like the she represents
something like um
the curse that's good for you the curse
that loves you right she she criticizes
but she loves her husband so it's a
loving criticism it's a loving complaint
but that's extremely dangerous in a
sense because you can also encounter the
curse that wants to kill you and this is
often something I mean you don't want to
have your enemy
integrate your enemy inside of you if
you don't have what it takes to give him
an identity that he'll accept so
this basically is uh if you want to take
it as a scientist a good example of this
process would be uh the difference
between like Newton and Einstein that's
a that's actually to me that is an
example of the story of Adam and Eve
because Newton is like Adam okay he just
names everything according to his theory
it all works great stuff you know it's
like a revolution it's still a
revolutionary way of thinking that he's
obviously a genius I mean he figured out
simple simple laws that explain vast
amounts of phenomenon so that's pretty
amazing but then Einstein comes along
and says
uh he puts the mirror basically uh in
the theory of classical uh mechanics and
he says where are you in the theory so
that's the mirror the feminine mirror
look at yourself in the look at yourself
so
and then so what does Einstein do he
says basically
all these categories that uh we're
creating classical mechanics they all
think they operate from a point that's
outside of reality so but then he says
look you're also in reality so your
concept of uh simultaneity is false
because you you think you're not part of
the things that are moving but you are
actually one of the positions that's
also potentially moving so you have to
Define things considering yourself as
part of the reality that you're
explaining right so
so what happens is all the categories
that are of classical mechanics that are
important such as speed uh distance
simultaneity things like that they all
get
warped they all get Warped because now
you're in the system so basically that's
what Einstein does to Newtonian physics
he forces the perspective to be in the
system that they're looking at so that's
like a like a cyclical view of yourself
right you're looking at yourself in the
mirror now and then it transforms all
the
um equations in a way and this is why
this is a good thing because he was able
to find an equation or a formula that
included Newton's physics it didn't
totally dismantle it and say this is
worthless right an integrated added a
little something yes it added a little
something so that uh Newtonian physics
is a special case of the other physics
that he found well that's what John
Piaget said happened to children doing
during their cognitive revolutions is
that and that's why there's progress in
science and conceptualization Contra
some of the more simplistic
interpretations of people who read
Thomas Kuhn is that each successive
Theory accounts for everything the
previous Theory accounted for plus
something additional and so now you said
something that was quite
uh mysterious and sideways that I want
to refer to you said that Adam and Eve
were tricked by the snake it wasn't that
they listened to them that they were
tricked and that you Associated that
with premature conceptualization so let
me Riff on that for a second so one of
the things that's really bothered me
about the postmodernists more than
anything else wasn't the problems they
posed it was the solutions they
generated and so the postmodernists were
among the first thinkers to note that
there was a real mystery bedeviling
perception which was how do we make
sense of the multiplicity of facts that
constitute the world or that constitute
even the entire Corpus of the potential
interpretations of a given text and they
investigated that thought well we don't
know how to make canonical
sense out of even a single text and so
and we don't know what to do about the
fact that we don't know how to do that
how do we rank order the importance of
texts or facts and that was a stroke of
Genius because that is a key question
but the the the prideful error was the
presupposition that was smuggled in
under the guise of a kind of neo-marxism
that the way that we solve the problem
of perception is through the imposition
of power and that our perceptions all of
our perceptions serve nothing but
compulsion self-interest and power and
so the question was formulated properly
but the answer was literally luciferian
which is the spirit that it orders the
world is predicated on nothing but the
imposition of compulsion and power and
what I see happening with you and
Jonathan and John vervaki in particular
in my work Bears on that and so does Ian
mcgilchrists and there are others is
that
no the lens through which we see the
world is an ethic and that ethic is
described in stories and the fundamental
Foundation piece of the stories through
which we view the world is biblical and
the biblical Corpus has a language of
symbolic representation and grammar that
you're outlining in your book
so what do you think about
that response to your proposition
well I I just wanted to say something
about what you said which which is
really important you said um because I
think what we have to understand is
where the difference lies between
uh uh the good curse which is what Eve
was supposed to bring or a taste of
death like I said he Adam was put to
sleep in order to bring forth Eve that's
a taste of death but it's not death
so what's the difference uh kind of like
uh the example that I gave about
Newtonian physics being transformed by
uh Einstein uh physics is
you put I put you to sleep a little bit
this is when Einstein is like look at
yourself in the mirror and then it seems
like your whole physics is going to
crumble for for a little minute there
right it looks like you're you're
finished I'm gonna replace completely
but then oh it's a little tweak
and this this in uh in biblical language
is called uh a woman crowning her
husband that's the name of it it means
there's a little bit of transformation
that was done but it's not it's not a
lethal transformation it's a
transformation that puts something above
the head so the head is the first
principles that are used or the
perception that was used in the first
place so it creates something above that
and that opens up the theory to uh
explaining even more but it doesn't
destroy it completely I mean you can
look at it politically too it doesn't
have to be just like scientific examples
you can look at it politically if the
left says
for example the left uh what's basically
the purpose is the same as if it's to
listen to the marginalized so who what
are the marginalized the people who are
maybe not satisfied with the names or
the Identity or the function that they
were given so she listens to the
marginalization they're the serpents on
the edge yes exactly so yeah she listens
to the complaints of the marginalized
and then she tries to formulate some
slight modifications without destroying
completely I mean you you don't want to
marry your enemy you don't want to join
with your enemy that's when all the
problems start if you join with your
enemy Eve is not Adam's enemy right she
could she can she's when she's fooled by
the snake then she becomes yeah she's a
a feedback loop of knowledge and what
happens
um how do you know the difference see
that's the thing you said it before it
was a preemptive uh
attempt to eat from the Tree of the
knowledge of Good and Evil uh and this
is actually interesting by the way the
the word that's used when when Eve says
I was tricked the word means uh lending
on credit
so see it's uh the meaning all the
meaning is there okay a couple of things
here I want to quote something by Alfred
North Whitehead the purpose of thinking
is to let the ideas die instead of us
dying
and so this idea of a salutary minor
death is extremely important because
even biologically as we progress Through
Time ourselves and our structures are
dying optimally to maintain their
Vitality so we don't have to die
completely and it's definitely the case
that psychologically that you can make
minor correctives when you hit a
stumbling block that help you
reformulate your theories without having
to become faronic and tyrannical and
then have everything burn in a
conflagration that you might not survive
and so there's an optimal level of
Correction and I think that's also
manifest in the experience of optimized
meaning because what I think meaning
does signify is information flow that's
optimally corrective without being
pathologically destructive
and that's a very deep Instinct for
adaptation and so then let me finish
that by trying to clarify something you
you just said which I think is of
crucial importance so do you believe
that the trick that Adam and Eve fell
for
that was presented by the serpent was
the presupposition of a comprehensive
knowledge because of the taste of the
fruit of the tree of Good and Evil the
presupposition of a comprehensive
knowledge
prideful presupposition of a
comprehensive knowledge while still in a
state of insufficient ignorance is it
something like the presumption of
personal omnipotence I would say it's
it's something like there's a it's like
I said before what you want to avoid is
joining with your enemy it sounds like
it doesn't say a lot but it says
everything because when you join with
your enemy once you you're United to
your enemy then you are you fall into a
paradoxical realm of cyclical
um cannibalism and things like that if
you read this story there's most of the
stories in the Bible are about that
actually if you read the story of Samson
that's what the story of Samson is
really about it's about Samson joins
with his enemy he he falls in love with
his enemy okay he's always wants a
foreign woman but that's also his enemy
and he does like he doesn't make the
distinction between a foreign woman that
loves him and that's actually uh not his
enemy and just the foreign woman that
hates his guts and he he like falls for
the ones that hate his guts that's what
it's the story of Samson is all about so
what happens then he he joins with
his enemy and once you join with your
enemy then you're in big trouble because
then
when you try to attack your enemy you're
attacking yourself so you you're now in
a sight you're now in a cyclical pattern
of self-destruction and that is what uh
the story of Samson is all about because
and at one point he figures it out near
the end he figures out the whole mystery
of it is once you join with your enemy
then if you kill your enemy you kill
yourself okay and Other Stories in the
Bible are about that very problem but
then at the end he figures it out and he
he figures out and he says okay if
that's the case then if I kill myself I
also kill my enemy and that's the
conclusion of this story of Samson he
basically kills himself he makes the
pillars fall and he knows very well he's
gonna kill himself and the conclusion is
but he killed more of his enemies okay
the idea is it's it's about a pattern of
overreaching
uh yes it's overreaching uh well this is
what I was saying before uh when it's
when it says that the snake tricked
tricked Eve the word it's used is lend
on credit the reason is because when you
buy something on credit it means that
you obtain something that you can't
cover okay okay so okay so let me let me
let me ask you about that and so so then
what that made me think was that well
there's the the tree with the fruit of
the knowledge of Good and Evil hanging
from it and there are elements of that
that we can ingest safely but the snake
is not one of them even though the
snakes in the tree and what that would
mean so we should be eating in some
sense the low-hanging fruit that's
actually within our grasp and if we try
to
consume let's say or incorporate the
entire snake then we do that on credit
and we do that to our own detriment and
that's going to knock us out of a
paradisal state of being into the
catastrophe of History that's what
happens when you bite off more than you
can chew or that you decide that there's
enough to you to face a serpent that's
too big so I'll add one more thing to
that I've been thinking about this
lately so we have
we're being informed constantly that
we're on the brink of an ecological
catastrophe that brings in the idea of
the left and and the corrective voice of
Eve and the marginalized let's say and I
might say well okay is that true or not
and that's one question and the second
question is if it's true who should
guide us through that potential
catastrophe
and the issue of whether or not it's
true is probably uh resolved by noting
that it's always true in some sense that
we're on the brink of an apocalyptic
disaster and that we have to be very
apprehensive and careful about such
things as long-term sustainability and
because we're very powerful now and
things are moving quickly that's come to
a head but then you might say well who
should lead us through that crisis and
here's an idea if you're facing a dragon
an apocalyptic Dragon that's so large
that it frightens you into paralysis and
turns you into a tyrant then you've
bitten off more than you can chew and
that your pride has set you up as
someone who can stand as a uh antithesis
to this particular apocalyptic serpent
but you're not the man for the job and
if you insist to assiduously that you
are you're only going to make things
worse and it seems to me that that idea
is analogous to the idea that you're
putting forward about the serpent as an
inedible fruit in the Garden of Eden
does that seem
even vaguely sensible yes yes it's it's
always about like you said it exactly
biting off more than you could chew and
there's an expression in French I can
translate it and you can tell me if it's
also an expression in English but it's
it's something like
um your eyes are bigger than your
stomach right is that an expression
English yes it is so
or yeah or your reach exceeds your grasp
and that is a sin of Pride so you think
it seems to me that you're and this is a
great mystery as far as I'm concerned
because it's not obvious exactly what
the error is in the in the in the garden
but you think at least in part it's an
error of overreach and pride that makes
real sense to me because it's definitely
the case you know if if we have to
encounter the world in a spirit of
gratitude and ignorance in order to
learn
then the thing and and and to learn
optimally which would put us in that
meaningful domain then the fundamental
spirit that opposes that is something
like the spirit of totalitarian
certainty about the fact that we've
Incorporated the entire Serpent and
that's what totalitarians constantly
presume is that we've got it right and
our theory is complete and there's no
exceptions to be allowed and if you say
anything contrary to that there's going
to be hell to pay you're heretical and
you need to be damned and alienated and
removed and maybe that's an echo of that
same
sin in some real sense
rather than the humility that would
enable you to encounter the proper to
ingest the proper size fruit and to
contend with the proper sized snake yeah
yeah there's two types of sin let's say
that are really basic and you can see in
in this uh this story or this whole
cosmology one of them is the sin of Adam
would be something like not listening at
all to Nature just I'm gonna impose
meaning and whatever doesn't fit can go
you know can go to hell or something
like that it doesn't matter so that's
one kind of sin but then there's the
another kind of sin which I think we're
actually seeing a lot of nowadays it's
eve eve the job of Eve is to provide
riddles for Adam I'm giving you some
riddles right that you need to solve now
uh and the purpose of these riddles is
to
refresh a science if we're talking about
science again refresh a theory show that
it's not complete
but in a way that usually doesn't
totally destroy it but you can also do
something else the sin of Eve would be
something like I'm gonna give Adam a
riddle that can't be solved
and see what he does with that
so a problem that can never be solved
here you go Adam saw that that's how Eve
becomes a tyrant that's how Eve can
totally dominate Adam by giving like
making him go through a labyrinth that
doesn't have an exit you know and he's
stuck in there forever maybe that would
be reflected biologically in the
potential proclivity of women to set
standards for men that are so high that
no productive Union is actually possible
and to never reward attempts to move
towards the good because it deviates
insufficiently it deviates and indicates
insufficiency in relationship to this
unobtainable ideal
because Eve has to be judicious and
selective but she has to make allowances
for a human Frailty that's on the same
scale as her Frailty yes if she if if
Eve loves Adam or if if the left wing
let's say if if we say the left thing is
like even which it is if it loves its
country the goal is not to destroy the
country
to go if the left wing starts to talking
about completely changing uh a founding
document or the Constitution or all the
laws or uh bringing in anyone that wants
to come in even if it's our enemies you
know you don't go to war with a country
and then bring them in that's a recipe
for disaster it's an obvious recipe for
disaster and anyone who engages in that
I think is is being tyrannical and is
has a purpose that's nefarious and they
want to destroy the country or they want
to destroy whatever organization I mean
you create uh anything you create is
limited in a sense and if you think you
can bring in all the flood waters
it doesn't make any sense unless you're
trying to destroy it and this is how you
tell the difference between Eve and Eve
that's tricked by the serpent Eve when
she's tricked by the serpent she she
thinks she can integrate absolutely
everything
but it's it's a it's a trick Everything
at Once instead of sequentially
Everything at Once yes not incrementally
that that's that's always the problem
that everything eventually can be
integrated but then if you do it too
quickly that's when you you join with
your enemy and then you're screwed and
then after that you're in a deep deep
trouble okay well so I've been thinking
about that on the environmental front
too because it seems to me that that's
exactly what we're trying to do right
now is we're trying to solve the problem
of sustainable economic development in
an emergency crisis instantly right now
for all time or else and the consequence
of that is we're trying to integrate way
too much at once with our totalitarian
presumption that we already know what to
do and in doing so we're going to bring
about the very catastrophe that in
principle we're trying to avoid yes
exactly absolutely what's going on I
think today is we want to to create well
when I say we I'm not talking about
myself because but somebody somewhere
wants to create a totalitarian uh
government or a world government or
whatever you want to call it it doesn't
really matter something that includes
everything and they're real anxious to
do it and real fast and that's the real
that's the end problem you want to do it
faster than you can handle it for
whatever reason I I mean who knows what
the reason is well because you just
don't know enough I mean the thing about
integration so here's another way of
thinking about it you tell me what you
think about this so I've been touring
with this notion is that one of the
Hallmarks of inappropriate public policy
is the use of compulsion
now I would say compulsion should be
restricted to cases of severe
criminality and psychopathy to that tiny
minority of people who just cannot play
fair by any rules whatsoever and perhaps
if they were told the right story in the
right way they'd play fair too but we
don't know how to do it but under normal
normative conditions if you have to use
compulsion to impose your vision of
paradise then it's not an adequate
vision of paradise it isn't motivating
and it isn't integrated and so when our
politicians are doing things like
driving up the cost of energy so that
people who are poor will suffer so that
their vision of Utopia can be brought in
hastily it seems to me that they're
committing this same Cardinal error and
it is one of Pride and luciferian
presumption
and maybe that's also part of the
temptation of the snake right because it
the snake is associated symbolically
with the luciferian intellect and pride
and also with the force that wants to
overthrow the Heavenly hierarchy that
think thinks it can replace it in this
Tower of Babel sense yeah that well the
snake often usually what it represents
you're not wrong though but uh maybe to
add to that the scent the snake usually
represents something like
um a perspective that's close to the
Earth something like matter the
perspective of matter but it's uh it's
basically the perspective of that which
is furthest from the meaning that was uh
given to things right any in any system
you have things that get pushed to the
margin so that's the Fringe perspective
yeah yeah and you can you can view it in
at different levels I mean the
ecological movements are are that
because they represent nature they or
they claim to represent uh it doesn't
matter if they really are aren't that's
what they embody they embody a mediation
between nature and civilization so
they're basically taking the perspective
of Nature and saying okay don't go too
far with your civil civilization uh
dominance you know because there's
nothing wrong with civilization but
obviously you can go too far but you can
also go too far in the other direction
you can start saying things like we
can't have any human activity anymore
that's bad because it harms nature you
know that's the other Sin from the other
direction yeah well and I think the
other sin there is that we can't have
any more human activity because it harms
Nature by the ethical preconditions that
I've adopted in relationship to my
worldview and I'm perfectly willing to
impose by force on others rapidly and in
an emergency Panic yeah the emergency is
a big part of it well I'm looking at
what's happening for example with the
Dutch farmers and the Dutch farmers are
among the most sophisticated farmers in
the world assuming that they're not the
most sophisticated which they might be
and now they're having these edicts from
the nature worshipers forced upon them
they're not being consulted with they're
not being brought in they're not being
integrated into the game
there's an imposition by force of a
particular vision and one of the
consequences of that apart from the
devastation of their livelihoods and the
destabilization of civil society is
going to be a radical increase in the
cost of food as well as
seeing simultaneously on different
fronts a radical rise in the cost of
energy
and so
and this is this is so you're
associating this with this proclivity to
undergo a insufficiently sophisticated
critique of the imposition of
civilization so one of the things you do
in your book which I really like that's
germane to this is uh
I'll turn to a a diagram that you have
on page 31 where you lay out a
relationship between abstraction and and
concrete examples that's Akin
symbolically to the relationship between
Heaven and Earth and so
Earth you you describe here as
um a set of concrete examples and Heaven
as an abstract principle
and so you say for example
there are two concrete examples might be
boat and Chariot so that's indicative of
a multiplicity of of modes of
transportation but they can be United in
a Transcendent reality in some sense
that constitutes vehicle and that's
really the nature of abstraction is that
you have a multiplicity of phenomena
from which you can abstract a common
principle and part of that is the
ordering of things and the subduing of
things and the putting of everything in
its proper place
but it's also a union of that
multiplicity into a higher order and
your
comments about Eve and I've noted this I
would say in my own marriage is that
imagine that I have a conflict with my
wife that's akin to the kind of conflict
that we're just describing and we want
to mediate that conflict
and one way is for her to submit to me
and another is for her me to submit to
her
and a third is that we can compromise
but a fourth is that be as a consequence
of the dialogue between us which would
be the masculine proclivity to impose
order and The Feminine proclivity to
speak for chaos and multiplicity we can
come up with a third solution that
transcends both our problems and that
offers a union that's preferable to to
compromise and certainly preferable to
slavery and submission but that would
involve a full dialogue right and a
bringing together of all the concerns
into a true higher order that did
account for all the multiplicity the
pattern you just described it in if
anyone wants to understand the stories
in the Bible it's always the same
pattern being repeated over and over and
you just have to be able to look at
different scales of it and just get used
to thinking fractively this is something
I think is completely lost there's a way
to see things in a fractal way where
every piece of a story
it expresses a certain pattern and the
whole thing expresses a certain pattern
uh it's it's very easy to get lost when
you do that but
it's basically very simple uh like any
story in the Bible you can use the
pattern you just described any story in
the Bible you can use that and you
understand it basically
so I I guess that would require some
examples but well let's let's use the
examples of the cherubim
so maybe you could elaborate because I
found that let me let me just read
something from the tetramorphic cherubs
from Ezekiel one and I found this part
of your disc your discussion
particularly Illuminating because I had
no idea what the cherubs are represented
and as far as I can tell there's
something like the monstrosities that
exist on the fringes of cognitive and
perceptual categories and they're part
of the support mechanism for the Divine
Unity that any given category represents
so I'm going to read this and I'll read
a bit of your commentary and then maybe
you can you can comment on it as I was
this is Ezekiel as I was among the
captives by the river shabar
or chebor the heavens were opened
and I saw visions of God a stormy wind
came from the north a great cloud with
fire flashing up from its Center came
the image of four living beings that
looked like the image of a human each
cherubim had four faces a human a lion
on the right a bull on the left and an
eagle
over the heads of the living beings was
the image of an expanse and it was on
the throne and on it was the image of a
throne and on the image of the throne
was an image that looked like a human
ezekiel's vision is the perfect example
of a narrative that seems cryptic from
the wrong perspective conversely in
proper context Cosmic categories like
Thrones cherubs and wheels are just as
fundamental as space energy and time are
to materialism
the tetramorphic Cherub described in
this vision is an obvious example of the
symbolic template that we just described
at the top of the structure the eagle
flying in the air represent above
everything and capable of great vision
by the way
the eagle represents a spiritual or
Heavenly principle which is too abstract
to be grasped without tangible
Expressions at the lower end the lion
bull Duality represents the corporeal or
Earthly basis that provides concrete
support for that principle at the center
the human is the knower that unites
spiritual and corporeal realities even
though these living beings might seem
random at first glance they perfectly
describe the inner structures of this
cosmology as a prophet Ezekiel was using
this symbolic language to describe the
very process of obtaining Divine
knowledge
we there's a tendency when we want to
interpret symbolism to focus on the
weird stuff
right because when you see something in
it in a story it seems weird it seems
unusual we we have a tendency to want to
interpret it uh symbolically because we
don't want to imagine some kind of weird
uh Chariot with uh animals in it you
know we we have a tendency to
immediately say okay this is symbolic of
something right it's like a dream
yeah it's it's
it's like he's seeing the categories of
uh he's seeing the metaphysics directly
that's what it's all about that that uh
that vision
he's describing the process of the the
visions of a prophet he's not even
describing his vision he's describing
the process of how he got to the vision
which is I don't think there's any other
place in the Bible where we see
something like that maybe in uh
uh Elisha maybe he describes a process
through it he gets the vision a little
bit I think if I remember correctly but
it's it's entirely different to describe
a vision and to describe the process
that brought you to the vision and The
Chariot is
he's describing the very process of of
of of a prophet so we got like a special
glimpse into his world there which is I
think is is a very interesting thing
right so so we get a we get a case there
with with with this Vision that the
Visionary is apprehending the structure
of the structure through which structure
is viewed yes exactly that's a vision of
the Heavenly structure in some real
sense and so that made me think you tell
me what you think about this when I read
this section on cherubs I remembered
that at the when God chases Adam and Eve
out of paradise
he puts cherubim to guard the gates of
paradise and they hold flaming swords
and that's always been a great mystery
to me both the cherubim and the flaming
swords and so then I was thinking about
that and I thought well
a sword is a tool of judgment and and
carving you can you carve up things with
a sword and you dispense with your
enemies with the sword and Christ uses a
sword in Revelation to separate the
wheat from the chaff and a flaming sword
is even more of a sword than just a
sword because it's a red hot sword and
so not only is it going to cut and
discriminate differentiate but it's
going to do so in a manner that burns
like the burning bush
and then I was thinking well if you want
to re-enter Paradise you have to subject
yourself to this flaming sort of
judgment in the real sense because you
have to carve away from yourself
everything that isn't fit to be in
paradise and that would be almost
everything well that would be everything
that wasn't perfect enough to be
paradisal and given how imperfect you
are the probability that you would
experience whoever was wielding that
sword as a monstrous cherubim with a
sort of flames strikes me as extremely
the probability that that's how you'd
experience it strikes me as extremely
high especially and that would be in
proportion to some degree to the
magnitude of your sinful nature
and so and I think that's associated
with the notion of the passion in the
Christian story that Christ has to
voluntarily accept not only death but
hell itself in order to reconfigure and
also associated with the symbolism in
Revelation that an apocalyptic judgment
has to precede something like the
re-establishment of a paradisal state
and so that all came out for me out of
your description of the cherubim which I
thought was extremely helpful by the way
the notion that these monstrosities on
the fringes support the conceptual
structure that's United by the
overarching Eagle Vision with the human
between the overarching vision and the
multiplicity of of Earthly categories
yeah yeah the the cherubim and the
Flaming sword I have to admit it's also
been something that's uh I found
intriguing for a very long time uh and I
think I I have a good grasp on it now
more than when I wrote my book actually
um because it's directly related to the
story of Adam and Eve again if you have
Adam naming the animals and then there's
a fall it means he lost his ability to
to name the animals so that there's a
confusion that enters into it and the
the
um the Cherub that's what the Cherub is
it's a confusion of species it's an
animal that has a confusion of different
species represents
yes so it represents Adam's inability
now to name name all the species
correctly and separately so he fell into
confusion so the cherubim is that
confusion it's a beast a hybrid right a
hybrid of species so it it represents
his inability to name the animals
correctly and then like you said the
sword is the the principle that would
separate them back again like it's it's
the logos it's logic it's uh light that
would separate the the Cherub again into
separate species and like you suggested
the bigger your sin the bigger the sword
you need and the bigger the monster you
have to face so the bigger the confusion
right well and I can't help but see you
know when when all this confusion about
naming of human identity came about in
the last 10 years this all this
confusion with regard to pronouns and
subjectively defined identity I couldn't
help but think about that as well I
believed at the time when the governor
mandated a certain type of pronoun use
that that was a form of extreme
conceptual I couldn't be a more a more
extreme form of conceptual confusion
that now are very agreement about what
constituted the most fundamental
categories of reality because I think
you can make a real case that male and
female are the most fundamental
categories of reality you know and I
think you can make that case
biologically because sex has been around
for a very very very very very long time
for hundreds of millions of years and
the proper perception of sexual
dichotomy is absolutely crucial to
survival itself and reproduction
obviously and mating but also a
precondition for the stability of
society as such and the insistence that
to bring in the marginalized we have to
demolish the entire structure of
categorization itself seems to me
tantamount to this sin that you
described that Eve would produce if she
insisted to assiduously that everything
be integrated at once yes exactly the
what you're talking about the
the idea that I give you my pronouns
it's just an example of what I was
saying before that Eve
um mediates with nature and then if Adam
names something uh it's possible that
there's a reaction and there's a
complaint like no I you don't name me I
name myself basically that's what it
represents it represents the same thing
as I was describing earlier so anything
that's named can decide at one point to
you know answer back and say no that's
you don't tell me what I am you don't
tell me what my name is I I'm the one
who decides my name and by the way the
the Flaming sword in the text it's the
Flaming sword that turns on itself
so that's also part of it it's very
interesting if you translate it
literally that's what it says a flaming
sword that turns on itself
right so that well that's interesting
you know because I would say to some
degree the harshest judgments that we
are
made subject to do come from within and
that a lot of totalitarian perception is
the attempt to escape the Flaming sword
of personal conscience by insisting that
the current theory of categorization is
sufficient and all that there should be
and that dichotomy between
fundamentalism and doubt I think is an
expression of that conflict so you think
that sword that turns on itself is that
part of an interior psychological
process that it represents
um sort of yes it's all part of a
psychological process for sure the
everything in the Bible is is has in
like an inner meaning but uh the sword
that turns on itself is like what I was
saying before the role of Eve is to show
a mirror to Adam and then then he sees
himself okay but when there's a conflict
between the two when there's when
they're enemies this is when
everything's working out right and they
love each other but when there's there's
a conflict then Eve shows the mirror and
it can't be solved and then he turns the
sword is the logo is trying to answer
and it can't solve the puzzle but so he
turns on himself is that the same as the
figure of the Medusa do you think the
the snake-headed woman that paralyzes
the man so completely that he turns to
Stone is that a mythological reflection
of the same imposition of an insolvable
problem
I haven't no I've never thought about it
but it seems like it's very similar yes
it because it's like an intractable
problem that if you look at it you're
finished right right it paralyzes you
well not and that thing is you know that
that fear in the face of uh a formidable
opponent which would be the inability
let's say to reach a mediating
arrangement with nature and The Feminine
that's that's the ultimate opponent in
some sense when it turns against you
that paralyzes you and paralysis is that
freezing in place that's characteristic
of a prey animal and that's represented
symbolically as turning to Stone in the
face of the snake-headed woman
yeah I'd have to think I to be honest
I'd have to think about it for a while
probably to figure out what that what
that image means but but I I think it
from at first glance it looks like
something very similar to what it's like
a problem that can't be solved and then
it like I was saying before if you get
if you enter a labyrinth that there's no
way out in a way you're paralyzed
because you're stuck in The Labyrinth
you're never gonna go out so it's it's
it's a form of paralysis what you do as
a clinical psychologist especially as a
behaviorist is very much relevant to
this discussion because you might say
well you need to set someone a problem
and a task in order to encourage them to
develop and so then the question becomes
well what size task should you set them
and there's two there's two extremes to
to the answer to that question and one
is a task so easy that the person can do
it without effort and the other is a
task so difficult that no matter how
much they try they'll never manage it
and what you do to avoid both those
errors is you establish a personal
relationship with the person that you're
trying to help transform and then you
experiment with a range of stumbling
blocks
until you find one that they're willing
to take on that requires some
transformation that they will in fact
Implement and that carries with it a
reasonable probability of success and
then you think well that is what you
should do in your relationship with your
wife and your husband right you want to
set them a challenge that moves you both
to a better place but that's not so
burdensome that it's impossible for them
to fulfill and it's absolutely and one
hundred percent what you do when you're
trying to encourage children to develop
because you put them in the zone of
proximal development which is a term
derived from vygotsky that signifies the
existence of the place where the
challenge is optimal to produce
cognitive transformation without
paralysis and tyranny
and that's all dependent on relationship
right you have to know the person that's
partly I think why hospitality is
emphasized so much in the Old Testament
is that in order to set the optimal
challenge you have to set up a social
interaction that's based on generosity
and love to come to understand the
person so that you can set the tasks
between you mutually so they're optimal
and not not paralyzing and tyrannical
yes yes exactly yes it's it's all about
finding
a foreign or an outer perspective that
loves you
that's like basically this The Secret of
almost all the stories in the Bible are
about that and uh the culmination of
that in the Bible there's like a thread
of narratives which is uh all about King
David because that's what King David
represents in the Bible he represents
the foreign perspective
that was brought in slowly
and carefully through generations and
then and then became
um the power of renewal so the first
king that of Israel is Saul right and he
makes a lot of mistakes and he's
basically is unfit and then so a renewal
renewer has to be brought in and that's
David and David is represents exactly
something like what you said he's the
adversary that loves you and and David
Never Never Kills Saul even though he
has many chances to do it he doesn't
kill him because he sees himself as
United with Saul they're both the king
at the same time so it's like he
understands the mystery that I was
describing earlier you don't want to
kill
be joined with your enemy and then kill
your enemy because you're you're killing
yourself so the whole story of David is
about
um
all the problems we've been discussing
since the beginning basically it's
David is a foreigner that was brought in
correctly slowly through time and David
loves
um
his people but he's a foreigner David
comes from a foreign line and then he
becomes king well when the King has
become tyrannical
so when your own order has become
tyrannical you have to bring in
something foreign that's outside in
order to counterbalance The Tyranny you
know you see the same pattern reflected
in Egyptian cosmology because in
Egyptian cosmology you have Osiris and
Osiris is basically Saul he's the Old
State and Osiris is old and
anachronistic and willfully blind and he
has an evil brother Seth whose name
becomes Satan through the coptics the
Egyptian coptics and Seth waits for an
opportunity to overthrow Osiris and he
becomes the ruler of the state and he
chops Osiris into pieces so he breaks up
the order completely and destroys it and
now rules as a malevolent power now when
Osiris falls apart
Isis who's Queen of the underworld comes
up again emerges out of the underworld
and so that would be the material realm
in some sense in your cosmology and she
finds Osiris's fellas and she makes
herself pregnant with it and then she
gives birth to Horus and Horus is the
eagle and the Falcon and the eye of
attention and he grows up outside the
kingdom alienated from it and then he
goes back to retake his kingdom but he
and he dispenses with Seth in a battle
so-called cataclysmic that and not one
of his eyes is torn out
because that's how damaging that
encounter with that malevolent Spirit
can be he gets his eye back and he
banishes Seth but then he goes to the
instead of ruling now as Victor he goes
to the underworld and he finds the ghost
of Osiris who's sort of fragmented and
in pieces and three-quarters dead and he
gives him the eye
and then they unite and it's their Union
that constitutes the model for the
Pharaoh in Egyptian political uh
political theology
so the idea is that you don't overthrow
the state you overthrow the you separate
the chaff from the wheat and you
conserve the state and you do that by
giving the dead State living vision and
the proper ruler is the combination of
the living vision and tradition that can
keep the archetypal Enemy of the State
at Bay
so that's an echo of the same idea that
you just described as characteristic of
the relationship between David and Saul
you see this necessity for relying on
the stranger quite often in the biblical
narrative so when Jethro
it tells Moses how to set up the proper
alternative to the Pharaoh in the desert
Jethro is an outsider too and a priest
he's a midianite priest if I remember
correctly and he tells Moses to set up a
distributed system of power and
responsibility as an alternative to
top-down pharonic judgment which is the
Trap that Moses is falling into in the
desert at that point so this
introduction of the foreign element
the proper leavening of the
of the tradition by the introduction of
the foreign element or the foreign woman
for example or the foreign agent who
acts morally despite their foreignness
that's a recurring Motif in in the Bible
and another reason for radical
Hospitality yeah yes it's a it's a it's
almost the universal motif of the Bible
if you almost every story if you
understand this pattern of the need to
find a foreign perspective in order to
renew yourself uh uh you can understand
a whole lot of stories just with that
that basic understanding but I mean
there's always a language that has to be
understood because things aren't
obviously aren't said in in such a
direct way you know so you have to
understand certain patterns that are
like for example the pattern of women
drawing water from a well
that's one way to represent the the
woman's role of mediator with the Earth
so she she goes and takes water from
below the Earth and she brings it up and
the purpose of the water is to refresh
and renew a system that needs it right
yeah a system it's become two desert
like
and it's sterile presuppositions yes and
they and can't
um can't doesn't have a feedback
mechanism for its errors I think I mean
if you have something that's too rigid
and error inserts itself into it
and you don't have a feedback mechanism
or a way to cleanse it like to wash your
feet this is how it's described in the
in the Bible if you can't wash your feet
then you'll end up with gangrene or
something you know what I mean you'll
end up with a serious problem but so
there's the woman that draws water from
below the Earth and brings it and Waters
it's about renewal and refreshment of
something but so I'm just using this as
an example but it's the idea that almost
every story in the Bible is describing
some very basic patterns and then you
just have to learn the language that
that's used to describe it because it
doesn't speak in a mathematical way you
know it doesn't speak with categories he
speaks with stories but their stories
are actually a lot more precise than
than people might imagine it's not vague
also precise and you point this out very
well in your work and your brother does
this extraordinarily well too they're
precise
their Precision is Amplified and
bolstered by this fractal quality that
you described is that because people
like Sam Harris for example this is not
a criticism of Sam are prone to say
you're just imposing an interpretation
on the story and how do you know that
your interpretation is correct there's
actually a technical answer to that
which in Psychology is known as a
multi-method multi-trate construct
validation process and the idea is that
if you want to see if something's
actually there you have to view it from
a number of perspectives as many
perspectives as you can manage and then
you have to see if each perspective
provides the same view
and so one of the things that you do
that's so remarkable in your book which
I think gives it a a an extreme level of
validity and reliability is that you say
well here's a pattern I inferred from
Genesis 1.
and then look this pattern replicates
itself
300 times
and how in the world so either you've
done a remarkable work of imagination
imposing an order that isn't there and
you've managed to pull out 300 exemplars
showing the existence of that pattern or
you've actually found something that's
implicant in the text itself and I was
certainly convinced by your book that
you had done the latter and not the
former and I would also say that it
wasn't merely a consequence of reading
your book because your book doesn't
exist in a vacuum and the symbolic
language that you lay out so clearly and
with a tremendous dearth of references
which is quite interesting is very much
akin to the same pattern that emerges
out of the writings of people like
mirchia eliada and Eric Neumann and Carl
Jung and the great investigators of myth
who have made propositions put forward
propositions that are very similar and
so Camille palia told me once I thought
this was extremely interesting I'm a
great admirer of Eric Neumann who wrote
a book called the great mother and
another called the origins in history of
Consciousness and he provides a very
acute and deep summary of Carl Jung's
thought he was a student of Jung's and
Jung wrote an introduction to the
origins in the history of Consciousness
and said it was the book he wished he
was able to write which is pretty damn
High Praise And Neumann's work is
analogous to your work in its symbolic
language and palia said that had the
postmodernists turn to Eric Neumann
instead of Michelle Foucault and Jacques
derida and the French Continental
philosophical neo-marxist crowd that the
entire history of intellectual Endeavor
in the humanities in the last 60 years
would have been written very differently
and I think that's absolutely true I I
had come to the same conclusion
independently of her and were quite
different as thinkers and so it was
quite striking for me to have her to
hear her say that especially about a
work that's as relatively obscure as the
origins and history of Consciousness
which is a great book it's a truly great
book and I definitely see your work in
the same tradition yeah I think I think
one of the maybe main differences with
what I'm doing uh maybe I come to
similar results but one thing I didn't
want to do uh was to do like a work of
comparative religion I always I tried to
avoid that uh not that I find anything
wrong with that but I I tried to write
something that only was based on the the
imagery of the Bible like I didn't want
to get into comparative religion I just
didn't want to do it there's already
work like that that exists so well you
did your comparisons within the biblical
stories so you took a comparative
approach but it was within text
comparative approach which I thought was
very powerful and very compelling and I
one of the things I should tell everyone
who's watching and listening is that
Matthew's book is very very
straightforward it's there's no there's
none of the murkiness let's say that
characterizes Carl Jung's work for
better or worse and believe me I'm not
making myself out to be uh a credible
critic of Jung he was unbelievably
brilliant in 50 different ways but
Matthew's book is I described it to my
son who is a computer programmer as a
programming manual for the biblical
narrative and you mentioned before we
started talking today that that is in
part your background that you do think
like a programmer and so maybe you could
explain that a little bit well for sure
um my my thought processes were
definitely influenced by mathematics and
computer science uh the mathematics
maybe just for the rigor of it um I mean
not every not every uh discipline
academic discipline has the same level
of rigor as mathematics and then and
there's a little bit of slackness
sometimes in certain areas I think which
lead to just things kind of being just
opinions you know but but when you study
mathematics you get used to just the
basic uh habit of not not dealing with
opinions you know I'm dealing with uh
derivations from from principles you can
agree with you could disagree or agree
with their first principles in
mathematic if you want but you can
hardly disagree with uh derivations they
they come up with and so that's I guess
influenced a lot of my my rigor and then
the other aspect I would say computer
science definitely uh prepared my my
thinking for a fractal way of
understanding things because
one of the rare I would say disciplines
uh that exist that study fractal
thinking I would say is computer science
okay expand on that because I don't
understand that I understand the fractal
issue with regard to the stories but I
don't understand its role in computer
programming
well I mean a part of computer
programming is to learn how to think uh
with recursion
so recursion is is
fractality basically it's it's just you
have a pattern that includes itself and
defines itself within itself uh so it's
it's it's just a different kind of
thinking you need to get used to that
kind of thinking you can't just pick it
up like that it you need practice okay I
just I just released an essay writing
app
uh called essay.app with my son and it's
also based in some sense on the
principle of recursion and so it teaches
people to edit their writing well
simultaneously apprehending multiple
levels of interpretation and so and this
is relevant to the layered structure of
reality that you lay out in your book
and so well what are you doing when
you're writing where's the meaning well
you could say you would say well it's in
the lines that make up the letters of
each word and then it's in the letters
themselves and then it's in the words
and then it's in the phrases and the
sentences and the organization of the
sentences and The Ordering of the
sentences within paragraphs and then in
the ordering of the paragraphs and all
of that has to
everything at each level has to reflect
the totality as a whole in order for the
piece of writing to be edited properly
and you point out in chapter 11 when
you're talking about the spiritual and
material Dimension something akin to
that again working on this idea of a
hierarchy moving from Earth to heaven
using the old cosmology of light air
water and Earth as a representation of
that cosmology and so imagine that we're
moving from dark and heavy to Bright and
light and dark and heavy would be Earth
and the multiplicity of forms that are
characteristic of the Earthly domain and
then above and that's solid and
multiplicitous and and and meaningless
in some sense and then above that is
water
which is more like fluid and light and
air and then above that is air and then
above that is light and that's a
pyramidal structure and light is
associated with apprehension and tension
and with the Pinnacle of the of the
pyramid and that's a recursive language
that's fractal in nature that's
reflective of the structure of Heaven
and Earth and those images recur
consistently throughout the Bible as
well as well as in ancient writings that
use this earth water air and light
cosmology
yeah yeah it's about seeing the the
always miniature versions of things
within themselves but I I think like you
said before there there are tests that
you can do to know if your
interpretation is is just your opinion
or your fancy or if it's actually
something legitimate and that's what
exactly what it is if you can find the
patterns that you're describing at
multiple levels of the story and also
there's other Pat I mean I think a lot
of people who criticize the Bible many
times atheists I guess are they're just
being dishonest they don't they don't
they don't know their stories they don't
know what they're talking about so I
mean it's it's a very
un unsatisfactory criticism in my
opinion so it's like me criticizing a
language that I don't even understand
and not even trying to learn the
language so or it's like it's also like
a scientist casually criticizing deep
literature it's like well someone like
Dostoevsky let's say is extraordinarily
deep and writes fiction and the notion
that that fiction is somehow meaningless
is absurd and the notion that there
aren't depths of fiction is equally
absurd and the idea that there are
depths means that there's a hierarchy
and the idea that the deepest parts of
the hierarchy of meaning are the Divine
Parts is a matter of definition
it's not a matter of interpretation it's
like well we experience deepest things
at the deepest levels and to not regard
the Bible in some fundamental sense as
the deepest of literature is only to
reveal your ignorance about the subject
it's as simple as that as whatever the
Bible is it's certainly deep and
mysterious and not least because it's so
intensely cross-referenced right and has
this immense amazing fractal structure
that you described here's here's an
example so
in the beginning God created the Heaven
you say immaterial meaning and the Earth
meaningless matter and then you go on to
say in biblical cosmology
the universe was created as a union of
heavenly
and Earthly components therefore
everything in it has both a spiritual
and material Dimension these dimensions
are often symbolized by a series of
layers in vertical space with the
relationship between each layer's
position and its degree of corporeality
top layers
are light and supple and bottom layers
are heavy and solid then you analyze
Genesis 1 2 the layers of vertical space
Earth
the Earth was meaningless and
confounding water
above the Earth Darkness was on the face
of the deep air above the water the wind
of God hovered over the face of the
waters light above air
light God said let there be light and
there was light
this Topography of vertical space is
Illustrated in the following diagram you
present a pyramid with the Earth at the
bottom and light at the top multiplicity
of Earthly phenomena let's say in a
singular Unity of light at the top
however there is no need to associate
the dots of that illustration with
atomic theories of matter instead they
simply illustrate the varying densities
of tangible stuff for each of these
levels the top levels are more implicit
than the bottom levels and therefore
have a less corporeal presence
in addition to the degree of
corporeality
these layers are also defined by their
degree of brightness
so Earth is dark and heavy and light is
obviously bright and Light
together these two Dimensions provide a
complete picture of vertical space in
ancient cosmology the material Dimension
goes from heavy to light well the
spiritual Dimension goes from Bright to
dark or from clear to obscure
there is also an inverse relationship
between these characteristics highly
corporeal things will naturally be low
in brightness and vice versa to fully
understand this inverse relationship it
is important to realize that matter was
inherently connected to Darkness and
ancient cosmologies in practice this is
the phenomenological aspect this is due
to the fact that matter causes obscurity
depending on its degree of opacity in
other words Earthly substances block the
light completely while more fluid
substances Like Water and Air have
greater degrees of transparency hence
there is an inverse relationship between
the degree of corporeality of a
substance and its degree of clearness
substances high in corporeality are
obscure due to their complexity while
substances that are low in corporeality
are clear due to their Simplicity and
will close with this
this pyramidal structure is a
fundamental pattern of interpretation in
the Bible it attaches a spiritual
quality to objects and events based on
their position in vertical space
in this context something may be
depicted as too high when it is too
simple to understand and too low when it
is too complex true knowledge is usually
depicted as Central in the sense that it
is complex enough to be tangible and
simple enough to be meaningful
it's brilliant very short chapter
chapter 11. we read most of it a Marvel
of what would you call that centrality
of meaningful Clarity and so hooray for
that you do the same thing in the next
chapter in some sense with nebucha
nazar's dream
yes yes yes exactly as as I was
listening to you read that I was
thinking myself oh that's why I use
diagrams in my book Because when it's
just a description like that it sounds
very complicated and and when you just
look at the picture it's like okay yeah
so as they say a picture is worth a
thousand words right I found an analogy
between you your use of diagrams in this
book and my use of diagrams in my first
book maps of meaning it while I was
working out the ideas in that book which
are analogous in many ways to the ideas
that you're presenting we're we're
definitely what what sniffing down the
same Trail let's say I found that in
order to understand what I was doing I
had to make the diagrams
and then I decided to include them
there's some 70 diagrams yours are
there's you have many more diagrams
they're more differentiated than my
diagrams by quite a
um a margin I'm going to read in a book
of nether's Dream from Daniel 2 31
because I think it's a great example of
this isomorphism of pattern and in such
a surprising sense right because in in
the previous chapter we have the image
of the cosmos that God creates laid out
in four lines and the relationship
between the different levels and then we
see the same thing reflected in a dream
using entirely different imagery but the
pattern is the same so this is from
Daniel 2 31 to 233
this image
which was large and whose brightness was
surpassing stood before you its head was
fine gold so that's the sun and the
Ethereal and eternal realm because gold
is Incorruptible and eternal and shines
like the sun its head was fine gold its
chest and arms were silver moving down
the hierarchy its belly and thighs were
brass its legs were iron and its feet
were iron and Clay so it gets heavier
and more material as you get closer and
closer to the Earth and it gets in some
sense more vulnerable too as you move
down the it's more vulnerable in some
sense as you move down the hierarchy
that's why we use the Expression feet of
clay
yeah so it gets harder and then but more
corruptable yeah yes the top of the
statue is a head of gold which is the
brightest and rarest of metals
conversely the bottom layer is made out
of iron and Clay which is the hardest
and most common of metals so this statue
is a microcosm of the elemental
hierarchy of light air water and Earth
that stretches from Heaven to Earth in
biblical cosmology yeah brilliant I
thought I thought
so all right so let's turn to
Jacob's Ladder
okay
do you want to do you want to delve into
that momentarily because that's a very
striking image and one that's rooted in
ancient shamanic tradition as well the
notion of a lyanna Between Heaven and
Earth at Jacob's vision is definitely
that so that's another example of a
hierarchy yeah so but I think it's it's
another example also of if you look at
these stories these ancient stories with
the wrong perspective they they look
completely arbitrary and random and as
if they were just inventions pure
inventions but if you use just the basic
categories of of these cosmologies
themselves then they become pretty
self-evident like why is it a ladder
Between Heaven and Earth I mean if
you're thinking materially why is there
a ladder Between Heaven and Earth it
doesn't make any sense but if you think
in terms of an ancient cosmology where
everything is based on the idea of
Heaven joining Earth then obviously
there's a ladder Between Heaven and
Earth and Well on a relationship between
the abstract and the concrete and the
relationship between the infinite and
the finite and and the relationship
between the psychological and the
material and that has to be a a
structure with some intermediary levels
yeah
yeah exactly yeah so so you can always
look at things with different lenses and
if you look at the stories in the Bible
with the lens
of the basic patterns of Heaven and
Earth and things like that then a lot of
the the questions that seem uh
unsolvable they become not only
unsolvable but self-evident so like why
is there a tree in the Garden of Eden
self-evident why is there a ladder in
Jacob's Dream self-evident It's always
just the connectors of Heaven and Earth
boom problem solved you know what I mean
it's it's all it all depends on how you
look at it sometimes you look at
something in one way it seems very
complicated you look at it another and
it's like okay right well and you
described earlier and I think this is
worth revisiting I mean we're going to
revisit the Sam Harris or even the
postmodern critique and so because it's
quite interesting that Sam and the
postmodernists do the same thing which
is how do you know you're not just
imposing your arbitrary interpretation
on a set of stories
and and then how do you know that your
arbitrary interpretation just doesn't
serve your need and motive for the
expression of power and those are good
questions but you can't rush right to
the answer that all interpretation is
nothing but the self-serving imposition
of power and it's all arbitrary except
at the behest of your whim Jesus that's
definitely throwing out the baby with
the bath water and it's a very
simplistic interpretation you could say
the same about science too
I mean anyone who claims to have a
theory about reality you could say how
do you know it's not just in your head
I mean you could say that about anything
the answer is the same how do you know
you experiment and you prove that your
uh your your ideas and your theories
are explain the phenomenon it's the same
thing in this story if you you say this
is all about a certain pattern that's
like your your theory well I can prove
it to you I'll show I'll read the story
and I'll show you that it's always an
expression of this pattern so you prove
it in exactly the same way as science
proves its theories you can also prove
it the same way that Kierkegaard and the
existential
existentialists insisted and I would say
this is basically an Act of Faith which
is you can take the pattern you can act
it out in the world you can use it to
govern your perceptions and to rule your
actions and then you can see what
happens in your life
and I think a lot of a lot of the
injunction in the Bible in relationship
to Faith isn't the command to accept a
certain description of reality at the
propositional level but to act in
accordance with this Divine cosmology
and then to
to see the manifestation of that that's
the fruits right by which the tree is
known to see the manifestation of that
decision to act and perceive in that
manner in the world
and that is a fundamental test and I do
think that's something that has to be
done at the level of individual the
individual that's definitely something
that Kierkegaard stressed immensely and
that people like solzhenitzen and Jung
and Dostoevsky for that matter also
insisted upon not that there's not a
communal element right because we need
to strive to do that together to
manifest our individual responsibility
but fundamentally the test is pragmatic
and and almost like an engineering test
which is take the story act it out and
stress test it
see if it helps you overcome the
insuperable obstacle and see if it
protects you from nihilism and despair
and see if it orients you properly in
relationship to yourself and other
people and see what it does with your
relationship with women and and and with
children and with your parents and you
can test the story that way
and as far as I can tell the Bible it is
the compilation of stories that have
been tested in that way yes exactly yes
you you can test it within the text to
know if if your interpretation of the
text makes sense within the text and
like you said that's even a higher level
I would say you could test it with
reality and then it's another story and
and if you start if you know the Bible
very well and you understand the stories
you'll you you might start to discover
that the patterns that are described in
the Bible will are also happening to you
all the time whether you want it or not
by the way yes well this is something
Jung pointed out you know he said look
whether you know it or not you're in the
grips of a myth
and he meant a story and you better
figure out what the myth is because it
might not have the ending you want
and I read that and I was quite
convinced by that because I started to
understand that was years ago decades
ago I'd started to understand that
the reason that we're attracted to
stories is because a story is a
description of the pattern through which
we view the world and the pattern that
we enact in the world and we value
stories because we want interpretive
patterns to make sense out of the
complexity of things and then the
question is well what story are you
acting out and the the
premature neo-marxist rejoinder to that
is well we're all acting out a story of
power and domination and I think that's
preposterous we opt we opt out a story
of power and domination when the proper
story is corrupted and demented so if
your relationship with your wife is
governed by power and authority then you
have a pretty appalling marriage and if
all you do is dominate tyrannize your
children well good luck with that and if
you bring the same attitude towards your
friendships and your business
relationships you're not going to have
any friends you might have cronies or
bully henchmen and you're certainly not
going to be successful in any voluntary
business arrangement
so there's a different ethic that
governs our perception and our actions
and it is oriented towards this higher
spiritual realm that well that you laid
out uh conceptually and that's detailed
out as the characterization of the
spirit that we should mimic in the
biblical Corpus
I think that's all become quite clear on
The Cutting Edge of cognitive science
let's say
yeah and you can't part of the
narratives of the Bible is is to move
from a state of competition where it's
just raw competition I I think kind of
what you're describing here with just
imposition of power so there's the the
realm of competition and that's
symbolized by a cycle and then it might
look like a fun thing to be in the realm
of competition but it's not because you
you always end up you sometimes you're
on top sometimes you're at the bottom
and it's a painful experience right so
what you want is to have a solution to
that competition at one point so a lot
of the stories in the Bible of competing
brothers are about exactly that so uh
Jacob and Esau and right it's zero-sum
competition
because you do have a competitive
relationship in some sense between Adam
and Eve because there's a there's a
there's an adversarial relationship
there though that's Bound in a higher
order it's not competition over a finite
set of limited resources
yeah that there's a name for that
um in the let's say the Jewish cosmology
or biblical cosmology there's the
concept there's there's a difference
between what's called an outer cycle and
an inner cycle an outer cycle is when
you're in competition like a war that's
an outer cycle and then uh an inner
cycle is a contained competition usually
made for selection and not always
there's other reasons for it and the
contain competition is what you want
it's basically what I was talking about
the role of Eve it's something like a
contained competition like for example
uh let's say in medieval it's like a
tournament a tournament that's a a
contained competition for selection
processes and that's like a female it's
the female rule that does the tournament
Piaget the developmental psychologist
identified that as a Hallmark of
appropriate developmental play
and so that's the idea that you unite
your striving towards a common Direction
that's what a game is
and then you compete for the purposes of
selection well the selection is the
victory in the game but it's also the
tuning and adjusting of yourself as an
Ever greater player both at the skill
level
which would be dependent on the
particular sport but also as a team
player as such because you also need to
facilitate the development of your team
and you have to learn to abide by the
rules that constitute the fair structure
of the tournament
yeah yeah it's a yeah exactly it's it's
a contained uh and so that's not a zero
sum yeah no it's not Zero Sum because
it's not a real war you're not trying to
obliterate your adversary or you're in a
war but part of this of a system it it's
it's the like I said the feedback
mechanism for a system is called an
inner cycle and when you when you lose
that then you fall into an outer cycle
which is war
now you're in constant state of war and
competition when you lose that you fall
out into an outer cycle so that means
that if you don't conduct yourself
in some fundamental sense according to
the rules of advanced development
fostering play that the alternative to
that is that outer cycle of real
conflict in the world where negotiations
and unity break down and you're forced
into a state of tyranny or slavery or
War that's the alternatives
yeah and you don't have an uh Arbiter
when you're in that level when when
you're in the other level you have a is
that how you say in English an Arbiter
yeah uh you're a referee Arbiter is fine
a referee yeah okay you don't have that
in the war domain so it might be a
never-ending conflict uh this is
actually one of the if you are familiar
with the story of uh Jacob and Esau we
have that in that story it's pretty
clear
um it starts with the mother which is uh
Rebecca she she says that inside her
womb they're fighting the the she has
twins right inside her womb they're
fighting inside her womb so this
represents what I was this represents
the inner inner War the inner cycle
that's mediated by her inside her womb
so she she has like the the wisdom to
mediate that and so she decides who is
um
who is worthy to be the the inheritor of
the
um
of the father you see what I mean so
there's like an inner conflict inside
the womb and she decides she does some
some little tricks there some some uh
some a little bit of deception there but
she decides who who ends up on top and
the reason she does that is if she
didn't decide it correctly there would
have been an outer War probably that
would have lasted forever between the
two um
between Esau and Jacob but then so
basically what she did avoided uh a
never-ending conflict between the two
brothers and the reason is uh well I
don't necessarily want to get in too
much detail but the reason is something
like
um Esau represents the
um
the firstborn in general in the Bible
represents the idea that you have to
solve the problem now
that's the firstborn because that's his
job because the firstborn inherits the
problems he inherits the the wealth but
he also inherits the problems and here
he inherits the times that he's in so if
you're living in a rotten time and
you're the firstborn it's actually not a
good thing you might think it's always
better to be the firstborn right but no
if you're born in a state of inversion
and clown World State you know like like
right now if you're born in a state of
corruption then you don't want to be the
you don't want to be the firstborn
because you're D you're going to have to
deal with that problem right now and the
second born or after the youngest or
whatever represents a time span that
will happen before it becomes your
problem so in a way when you're in a
corrupt world it's better to be the
second born and a lot of stories in the
Bible relate to that so Cain and Abel is
the same thing
so in the story of Cain and Abel it
um descent the fall just happened so
everything's the Earth is cursed and a
um Kane is the firstborn so he has to
work the Earth that's his job he
inherits this world this is this is a a
way to describe it this world and he so
he's in a corrupt world where the Earth
is cursed so it might seem like a great
thing that he's the firstborn and he
inherits the land but it's not because
it's cursed okay so he's in a bad
position really so what happens is Abel
he what he does is basically nothing he
just he doesn't Advance his knowledge he
just preserves the traditional knowledge
so in a way Cain represents the
scientist in a way and Abel represents
the the priest or the uh the traditional
uh so let's say for example in
Christianity the Abel would be something
like the continuation of the tradition
of Christianity while Cain would be
the one who's got to solve the problems
as they are right now
and then when there's a fall a fall away
from
understanding what tradition means and
how how it applies to reality then Kane
is in trouble because he has to solve
still solve the problems of the earth so
like a scientist he has to see what's in
the earth see what's the facts that are
before him and he has to solve them but
he doesn't have the higher knowledge
to solve it correctly so that it doesn't
destroy him right so sometimes sometimes
the firstborn who's the Cardinal
inheritor of the tradition is cursed
because the tradition itself is cursed
and the second born and often lesser so
to speak son is the preferable
alternative and that pattern is repeated
because he has time right
yes because the second born has the time
to like ruminate on the problems it
doesn't have to solve them now you just
take his sweet time and when he solves
it then he acts this is what Jacob and
Esau represent too uh it's a very
interesting story by the way Esau
he at first he thinks he's angry when he
gets his inheritance stolen or whatever
but then later when he encounters Jacob
he's not even angry
and this is a weird little event that
happens in the story it's like why isn't
he angry like Jacob is afraid he's going
to be killed by his brother but then he
meets his brother and he doesn't really
care and the reason is because
he he gets he gets the land right away
and that's what he wants so he get it's
illustrated by it says he has 400 men
with him okay the 400 men represent the
land let's say the potential of the land
he gets them right away and Jacob he
doesn't get 400 men that follow him he
gets 400 years of Exile okay so the 400
years of Exile is the time needed
for the rumination to to solve the
problem correctly and slowly and
patiently instead of rushing into it
instead of it's It's a solution to not
eating the tree of the knowledge of Good
and Evil you need to wait for the
solution and then you can do something
so in certain cases it's better to be
the second born that you can wait
take your sweet time you don't have the
responsibility of solving the problems
of the land
and the other guys has a heart attack
right and there's well there's an
injunction there to the kind of patients
that also enables you to allow the
solution to present itself instead of
assuming that you're the man to take on
that particular Dragon right here and
now in the way that you think is fit yes
and that that's the burden of the
firstborn that's the burden of the
firstborn he has to do it now it's his
job is it also relevant that Jacob is
the person who becomes Israel that
becomes the person who's wrestling with
God I mean if if you're if your
interpretation if I Riff on your
interpretation it's something like the
firstborn is the inheritor of the proper
tradition but Jacob
is a someone who's wrestling actively
with God he's he's engaged in the
process of trying to come to grips with
what's meet and right and to put that
whole hierarchy in order and maybe his
mother prefers him because he has that
Spirit of active engagement rather than
the imposition of traditional
what would you say Traditional Values no
I don't I don't think so I think it's
the other way around I think it's the
other way around I think Esau is trying
to impose not necessarily tradition he's
just trying to solve the problems that
present himself to him in the land where
he's in which is Canaan right and the
problems are huge when he's he gets
there because there's enemies everywhere
right he's in a Strange Land so he's
supposed to inherit the land right now
but this is a big job he's he's alone
against a sea of adversaries you know
the land is cursed the land is corrupt
so what does he do he he hires it
doesn't say he hires them but he he gets
400 men to follow him but the idea is
these aren't reputable men you know
they're like mercenaries or something
like that that's that's the general idea
it's not a well-chosen uh 400 men to
follow him while Jacob he has the
advantage of being being forced in fact
to wait what is he waiting for he's
waiting for
the problems to resolve in a in an
easier way and then maybe he can
intervene at one point later well 400
years later according to that story uh
but the wrestling thing is is a kind of
a difficult to explain I can explain
just a little bit maybe you might find
it interesting what happens when he
wrestles The Angel is the angel
strikes his leg curses his leg it says
or plagues his leg and then what happens
after that it says
now his uh his limp he limps right
because his leg has been uh hit by the
by the wrestling so again the word for
limp here is the same word that it's
used to say that Eve was taken from the
side of Adam it's the word side so he
limps means that one of his side is not
functional it's limping it represents
Eve okay does it also represent this
sort of this small death that's a
antithesis to agree with death yes okay
okay yes and and what happens because
he's plagued in his leg this looks like
a bad thing right it looks like a curse
but because he's he's limping he can
only go slowly now he only walks slowly
and this is what happened he meets Esau
and Esau is like uh let's do our journey
together because Esau thinks he's got it
figured out he's got 400 men behind him
he thinks he's the best right he thinks
he's got it figured out he's a tough guy
now but Jacob is like oh sorry I can't
follow you I'm limping you know I'm I'm
gonna go at the speed of the children in
the flock that's what he says what does
that mean it means I'm I'm forced now
because I wrestled with the with the
angel this has forced me to take my time
to go slowly because one of my legs has
been cursed but now it's it's a bad
thing that turns into a good thing
because he has to go extremely slowly
and he has to take care of everyone
while doing so yes and he has to wait
for a right right time to solve the
problem when he's able to solve the
problem and and this represents also it
represents the 400 years of Exile that
he has to go to in a sense one of his
legs is is
um injured and that represents the time
also that he has to go into Exile and
see it says in the story when he gets
his leg injured it says till this day
the children of Israel don't eat from
the sinew of the
basically the place where he was uh hit
where he was cursed see what that means
is it's the equivalent of saying oh
we're not eating from that part that we
can't handle the part that we can't
handle right now we're not going to eat
that that's like saying we're not going
to eat from the Tree of the knowledge of
Good and Evil right away that means you
picked you pick a monster that's the
right size for you and you do that
judiciously and with great care and that
makes real sense to me an increasing
sense we talked at the beginning before
we entered this conversation that we
were also going to discuss some of the
things that you're working on now and so
what are you working on next uh well
actually because since we had we didn't
really control the conversation as what
always happens in a conversation I guess
uh I kind of started talking about what
I was working on I guess that's what's
in my my mind right now so he comes out
so uh yeah my what I'm working on
basically is my first book I wrote it
from a really we can say male
perspective I guess like logocentric
perspective because that's totally lost
anyway it has to be dealt with not dealt
with in a in a negative way but we have
to understand this because it's been
lost but then since then I've I've had
time to look try to look at it from
let's say Eve's perspective or the
female perspective in the Bible which is
something that feminists do actually and
this is one of the when I was in
university I studied religious science
and I had this strange interactions with
the Department of religious studies
because I realized it was let's say
taken over by feminists it was totally
taken over by feminists and that kind of
put me off right because I wasn't I
wasn't looking to become a feminist or
anything like that so I wanted to learn
about the Bible I didn't want to become
a feminist so that one of the reasons
why I sort of quit that uh academic
world and I just decided I was going to
do it on my own which is what I did and
that's basically we could say the story
of my first book I kind of steered away
from Academia and I decided okay I'm
gonna just focus on this myself
but now since then since I've written my
my first book I've had the chance to
try to look at it from another
perspective and I I really have been
doing that and I've been doing trying to
look at it from Eve's perspective and
I've shared a little bit of what I've
discovered in our conversation about uh
Eve listening to the snake and what that
means so again it has a lot of
implications and uh all the story
basically I'm interested in the feminine
uh roles and the stories of the Bible
because I think it's something that's
very misunderstood how far are you
through your next book then uh I'm still
in the planning stage
just figuring out what I'm going to talk
about right well I got to say I'm very
much looking forward to it and maybe if
you would find it useful
um to have discussions along that uh
Dimension as you're moving forward
through the book I'd be more than happy
to do that I think it'd be very
interesting to see how you would
approach the problem of the feminine I
mean my wife and I have been talking
about that an awful lot we're trying to
puzzle through
as we tour around the world and talk to
people we're trying to puzzle out the
role well the role she plays in
relationship to what I'm doing on what
we're both doing in our lives and
exactly what that role should be and
then how to formalize that and
conceptualize that and to communicate it
it's a very complicated problem partly
because for example because women are
hypergamous they want males who are of
equivalent or higher status than them
socially and the the same isn't true in
reverse and so what that seems to
indicate is that women and and the data
Bears this out by the way women are not
happy if they are
um associated with
a relatively low status partner in
comparison to their own status and what
that seems to me to mean is that to some
degree it's incumbent on women to
support their husbands to the degree
that's possible in achieving and
maintaining the status that would make
them as women satisfied and I don't
exactly know what that means practically
in relationship between a man and a
woman but I know there's something
that's deep about it and that it's
something that our culture has done a
very bad job of sorting out conceptually
and technically yeah yes I think it's
even in Tradition the the feminine role
or the female role it's kind of it
represents a little bit the esoteric
side of of any tradition it because like
I said it it's the the criticism of it
the tradition has its own criticism
within itself right it's like that's the
eve criticizes Adam so every tradition
has in it a feminine aspect which
criticizes the tradition but this is
done discreetly right that's that's
um it's done lovingly and discreetly so
yes and so you have to read between the
lines right well the criticism should be
one of encouragement rather than
denigration right I mean if I'm going
through someone's essay and criticizing
it and all I do is tell them how
terrible it is and how stupid they are
that's not going to be helpful but if I
say
you know here's the way this sentence
could be reformulated to make it clear
and here's something you wrote that's
really quite stellar and I help them
separate the wheat from the chaff then
the criticism serves the higher purpose
of having them develop and that's a
purpose that's part of love because love
isn't just acceptance It's also
encouragement that's the judicious part
of love and the antithesis to what would
otherwise be an overwhelming and
drowning Mercy yes yes so yeah basically
yeah we've been a little bit discussing
these questions uh I guess like I said
is because what's going on in my head
that's the subjects that are interesting
to me right now so I can't help but
communicate them I guess but yeah it's
so it's
because because it's discrete because
the female role of criticism of a
tradition is discrete it ends up being
hidden in a way and when you can find it
it's hard to find if you can't
understand it it's hard to find if you
start to understand it and you see it
then you see it a little bit everywhere
and you see the the female role is is
just as important as the male role and
the tradition but it's it's discrete
because when it stops being discreet
then it becomes an adversary so there's
a proverb that says uh
um How does it go it says
a golden ring in a pig snout is a woman
without discretion right that's the
whole symbolism that I'm describing can
be summed up in that in that proverb and
the word in that proverb without
discretion the word is actually taste it
literally it's translated you could say
without taste and what that means is
taste
the ability to taste is part of the
female role it means eat just a little
bit that's what tasting is yes women
actually have a much more uh just
differentiated sense of taste and smell
by the way than men too by oh really
speaking yes yes it's the case so if you
eat just a little bit it's like the
taster of a king basically right the
idea is a taster of a king doesn't die
every time he does his job that's
ridiculous he has to have a a sense of
taste that is extremely refined so that
if he eats tastes something he can know
ah this is poison don't eat it
so that's part of the mystery of the
female role in the Bible it's like a
woman with taste the female can identify
what's poisonous early so that it
doesn't become so poisonous that it's
destructive and that's part of that
discretion and judgment yes and she can
bring that to the attention of her of
her mate here's a potential place of
danger and Peril that you're overlooking
that would also make sense in
relationship to women's finer tuning on
the negative emotion side because women
do feel negative emotion more intensely
than men and that means that their
bellwethers for for uh for or alarms in
a real sense and they need to be that
because they also have to be sensitive
to the more
um what would you call it vulnerable
needs of children yes that makes sense
yeah well Matthew it was a great
pleasure speaking with you um
I appreciate it a lot I really liked
your book I would say to everyone who's
watching that you could do a lot worse
than to spend a couple of hours reading
through Matthew's extremely clear book
the language of creation 2018 Cosmic
symbolism in Genesis a commentary that's
available broadly on all the easiest
place to get it is Amazon
um it's very well reviewed on Amazon
especially for a self-published book and
I think it's a travesty in some sense
that it had to be self-published because
I do think there's some real possibility
that it's a great book and uh a great
book is a very difficult thing to manage
especially when it's simultaneously deep
and clear and I found it extremely
useful I'm going to read it again
I'm really quite in awe of your capacity
to unite the highest and lowest in such
a clear and concise and straightforward
and rational manner so to the degree
that you were serving the masculine
logos in relationship to that book man I
think you nailed the target Dead on
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com